JUDY WOODRUFF: Good
evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
On tonight's "PBS NewsHour":
Presidential candidates fight to
stand out on stage -- the
hits and misses from the
first Republican debate.
Also ahead: In Ferguson,
Missouri, one year after the
death of Michael Brown, a
community
seeks justice and
lasting change.
BRITTANY PACKNETT, Activist: We
stand here not even halfway
through 2015, and nearly
700 people have been killed
by police in the U.S. alone.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
are here to analyze last
night's debate and the
rest of the week's news.
And a force in the water --
American swimmer Katie Ledecky
wins gold and breaks records
at the world championships.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. economy
turned in another solid month of
job creation in July.
Labor Department numbers
released today show that
employers added a net of 215,000
new
jobs for the month. The actual
unemployment rate held steady at
5.3 percent.
A wave of violent attacks broke
out in the capital of
Afghanistan today, killing
scores
of people. The first, a massive
truck bomb, flattened an entire
city block in Kabul and
left a 30-foot crater. The blast
killed 15 people and wounded
240. Later, a suicide bomber
blew himself up at a police
academy, killing at least 20
recruits and wounding 24.
The nuclear agreement with Iran
faces a fresh challenge within
President Obama's own party.
Democratic Senator Chuck Schumer
of New York, in line to become
minority leader, announced
his opposition last night. He
said in a statement: "The very
real risk that Iran will not
moderate
and will instead use the
agreement to pursue its
nefarious goals is too great."
Today, traveling in Vietnam,
Secretary of State John Kerry
said he profoundly disagrees
with Schumer's decision.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: If all you do is refuse
this deal and say no to this
agreement, you just say no,
there is no other alternative to
the fact that Iran will begin
to enrich, will pursue its
program, we will lose
international support, we will
lose the
sanctions, we will wind up in a
situation where we do not have
the ability to inspect
or to check their program.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Other Senate
Democrats have been lining up in
favor of the deal. Wisconsin
Senator Tammy Baldwin
announced her support today.
In Central Syria, Islamic State
militants have abducted at least
230 people, including
dozens of Christians. Activists
say it happened overnight at a
town in Homs province after
the extremists captured the town
from pro-government forces. The
rest of those seized were Sunni
Muslims.
The World Anti-Doping Agency
says an independent commission
will investigate allegations of
widespread use of illegal
substances in international
athletics. German broadcaster
ARD has reported
that more than 800 athletes had
suspicious blood test results
between 2001 and 2012.
The reports are based on data
leaked from the International
Association of Athletics
Federation.
In California, hundreds of
evacuees from a wildfire north
of San Francisco were allowed
to return home today.
Firefighters now have the Rocky
Fire nearly half contained.
Since
last weekend, the fire has
destroyed 43 homes as it charred
nearly 109 square miles. About
12,000 residents are still under
evacuation orders or warnings.
And Wall Street ended the week
with more losses for the seventh
day in a row. The Dow Jones
industrial average gave up 46
points to close near 17370. The
Nasdaq fell 13 points, and
the S&P 500 shed six. For the
week, the Dow and Nasdaq lost
nearly 2 percent. The S&P
was down more than 1 percent.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
memorable moments from last
night's Republican debate;
how Ferguson has changed a year
after the death of Michael
Brown, and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It was one year
ago this weekend when the city
of Ferguson, Missouri, quickly
moved to the center of national
attention. Protests followed the
fatal shooting of Michael
Brown by a police officer.
The police response and the
unrest that came afterwards
called more attention to
shootings
and the militarization of police
forces across the country and
triggered more debate and
calls for reform.
Hari Sreenivasan returned there
to see how Ferguson is faring.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Clifton Kinnie
had no idea how much his life
was about to change at this
time last year. Then 17 years
old, his mother had just died
from stage four breast cancer.
He was at home and depressed,
when social media brought him a
picture of Michael Brown's
body just a few miles away.
CLIFTON KINNIE, Youth Activist:
And at first, I didn't think it
was real. I grabbed my keys
and I drove straight out there.
And just seeing the reaction
from the people, the community
there, who were trying to figure
out what's going on, right,
trying to figure out, why
is this kid laying
in the street?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Outrage pulled
Kinnie out of his grief and led
him into the nightly
protests.
CLIFTON KINNIE: My first getting
hit with tear gas, rubber
bullets was August the 12th.
My lungs were stinging. I began
throwing up. I think there was a
little blood in there.
And I was crying.
MAN: You must
disperse immediately.
CLIFTON KINNIE: But I wasn't
tearing up because it was
painful. Yes, it was painful,
but I
tearing up because I couldn't
believe something like this
could happen in 21st century
America
or a small town like Ferguson.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Kinnie went
back to high school. He started
a week late because of
the unrest and channeled
that outrage into action.
Texting among his friends led
300 classmates to his backyard
to start what became Our Destiny
Saint Louis, a small student
group promoting social
engagement among young people.
Ever
since, Kinnie has organized his
peers to pursue justice in their
communities.
CLIFTON KINNIE: The problem in
Saint Louis has become far
deeper than just policing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In February,
Clifton spoke in front of the
Ferguson Commission, volunteers
appointed by the governor of
Missouri to examine the root
causes of the shooting, the
reaction
to it, and ways to prevent
this from happening again.
The group has met more than a
dozen times, tackling topics
such as health disparities,
education equity, and
law enforcement policy.
On that commission is Brittany
Packnett, someone who grew up
grocery shopping in this
neighborhood,
getting her hair done along West
Florissant Avenue. A year ago,
this familiar street was
unrecognizable.
BRITTANY PACKNETT, Activist:
What flashes through my mind are
the armored vehicles and
rifles and body armored police
officers that would fill these
parking lots. What crosses
my mind is trying to Vine videos
of when rifles are pointed in
people's faces and of us being
tear-gassed to make sure
that people knew the truth.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The year has
been filled with keeping the
issues from Ferguson front
and center, including a
trip to the White House.
BRITTANY PACKNETT: There is
still so much more to be done.
We stand here even not even
halfway through 2015, and nearly
700 people have been killed by
police in the U.S. alone.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That sense of
urgency is not lost on police
Sergeant Dominica Fuller.
SGT. DOMINICA FULLER, Ferguson
Police Department: I was
surprised. I was hurt. I was
afraid.
I was saddened.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A lifelong
Ferguson resident and mother,
Fuller is also a 17-year member
of the police force. Three
months ago, she rose to the rank
of sergeant. A year ago,
some of her family sided with
the protesters against the
police.
SGT. DOMINICA FULLER: When
you're family, you are going to
agree to disagree, but my
safety came first, and
they understood that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This spring,
the U.S. Justice Department
investigated the practices of
Ferguson
police, finding officers
routinely arrested citizens
without probable cause and used
unreasonable
force against the city's
African-Americans.
The sergeant wears a body
camera, like all Ferguson police
do now, one change in the
past year, but Fuller says she
hopes some of the basic tactics
she has learned working
a beat will spread throughout
the department, part of an
emphasis on community policing
going forward.
SGT. DOMINICA FULLER: You have
to have compassion in this job.
You have to have understanding
and you have to be patient. We
now focus on the community a
little bit more. We're in
the schools. We're able to go
sit with the kids in the park.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Ferguson has a
new judge, new city manager and
the city's leadership
is now more diverse. The interim
police chief is
African-American, as are two
newly elected
city council members.
SGT. DOMINICA FULLER: What
happened in the city of
Ferguson, a lot of cities can
learn
from. When they sit back and
realize, it could have happened
to us, let me pay attention
and see how they're
addressing it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Missouri
legislators proposed a number of
measures, ranging from bills
requiring
body cameras for police officers
to ending racial profiling and
the use of lethal force
by police. In the end, only one
bill passed, a missed
opportunity for progress,
according
to Missouri State Assemblyman
Courtney Allen Curtis.
COURTNEY ALLEN CURTIS, Missouri
State Assemblyman: We had the
worldwide attention on us. We
could
have been a leader, but we
haven't been. We could have
implemented the body cameras. We
could have made significant
strides towards improving the
education system. We could have
done economic development
packages to bring more jobs to
the area.
And while we talked about doing
that, we haven't done nearly
enough to actually implement
those
talking points.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The new law
limits how much of a municipal
budget can come from traffic
fines, ironically leading
Ferguson into a budget deficit.
New rules also ban courts from
jailing someone over small
traffic fines, practices the
Justice
Department condemned. News of
the Justice Department report
and the new state law continued
to keep Ferguson under a
spotlight, a light some local
residents wanted to turn towards
something different.
BRIAN FLETCHER, Former Ferguson
Mayor: We started making up
T-shirts. Then it came into
coffee mugs, a license plate,
stickers, wristbands. You got
kids and toddlers. These are
onesies
for the babies. They got a
little caboose on the bottom.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Former
Ferguson Mayor Brian Fletcher is
currently a city council member.
Struck by the negative portrayal
of his hometown, he began
getting his own message out
starting
with yard signs that say
"I heart Ferguson."
BRIAN FLETCHER: Starting moving
across Saint Louis and actually
orders from across the
United States and the world to
the state. We have issued 10,450
yard signs.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So far, he
says that they have donated
$130,000 to local businesses,
all part of a larger campaign to
show Ferguson moving on. We
heard this radio ad on his
phone.
NARRATOR: You can't change
history, but you can learn from
it. And there is definitely
a spirit of optimism in the air.
So, grab your keys and the
family and come see and
enjoy the new face of urban
America, Ferguson. Better than
ever with more to come,
Ferguson,
we can do this together.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But the
campaign sends a different
message to some.
RASHEED ALDRIDGE, Ferguson
Commission: It was almost like a
counterprotest to the protest.
It was almost say -- to not even
acknowledge of what happened.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Rasheed
Aldridge, a Saint Louis native,
is the youngest member on the
Ferguson Commission.
RASHEED ALDRIDGE: To just be
like, oh, there's nothing wrong.
We love Ferguson. You see?
Just look at us. We're happy,
we're people, we're having a
good time, look at the
businesses,
and not to acknowledge life
was taken in Ferguson.
How do you love Ferguson and not
acknowledge the hurt that the
people in Ferguson are going
through? It didn't make sense.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The QuikTrip
minimart convenience store that
burned down in the aftermath of
the shooting was behind this
fence on West Florissant Avenue.
The Saint Louis Urban League
plans to open a job training on
this site, one more sign of
Ferguson moving forward.
For activists like Packnett,
it's the single step on a long
road.
BRITTANY PACKNETT: We cannot
quit. We absolutely cannot stop.
In fact, we need to move
further,
faster.
HARI SREENIVASAN: When Clifton
Kinnie gets disillusioned with
the pace of the justice
movement, he turns to this, one
of the last pictures of his mom.
CLIFTON KINNIE: It reminds me
that, despite everything
negative going on in my life,
that
I can accomplish what I want to
accomplish. If she could do it,
having stage four breast
cancer and eight kids, going
back to school and getting a
degree, I can do what I want
to do and need to do in
order to help people.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right.
She'd be proud of you.
CLIFTON KINNIE: Thanks, man.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Kinnie begins
Howard University in Washington,
D.C., in the fall.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan for the
"PBS NewsHour" in Ferguson,
Missouri.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Shields and Brooks analyze the
GOP debate and more of the
week's
news; a stroke of gold for
American swimmer Katie Ledecky;
and lifting the curtain on
diversity in film.
But, first, the European Union
today appealed to its member
states to live up to the
financial
pledges made to Greece and
Hungary to assist with some of
the nearly 225,000 refugees and
migrants who this year alone
have left upheaval in Africa, in
the Middle East and Southwest
Asia to try to reach Europe.
In the north, near the English
Channel, several thousand people
are camped out, many hoping
to pass from France to England.
The British government says
taking in the displaced people
will only encourage more to
come. But just today, it was
reported that a 40-year-old
Sudanese man managed to evade
elaborate security and walked
almost the entire dangerous
31-mile
length of the underwater Channel
Tunnel before he was arrested.
"NewsHour" special correspondent
Malcolm Brabant reports tonight
from the French port of Calais.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Under British
pressure, reinforcements, the
French riot police have been
sent to Calais
to try thwart the migrants on
the final leg of their odyssey,
among them, a man fleeing
the Syrian civil war who
didn't want to be identified.
MAN: Police closed the border.
So, we try go to train, but the
police is big people.
They're like animals. We don't
like it. They're not behaved
police. They told me you have
to go back. I go back and try
again, but it's very hard to go.
We need a solution. I don't
know what we're going to do
here. We don't like to stay in
France.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Additional
measures designed to beef up
security at the Eurotunnel
carrying
trains between France and
England appear to be working,
according to the British foreign
secretary, Philip Hammond.
PHILIP HAMMOND, British Foreign
Secretary: I think we have a
grip on the crisis. We saw
a peak last week since when the
illegal migrants has tailed off.
We have taken a number of
measures in collaboration with
the French authorities and
Eurotunnel.
MALCOLM BRABANT: As a result
there's increasing frustration
among migrants. They have
established
a squalid camp in the sand dunes
called the Jungle. It's a launch
pad for thousands of
dreams that failed to fly.
Having risked his life crossing
the Sahara Desert and the
Mediterranean, Tasbe Tasbasalasi
(ph) is dismayed at the
conditions. A reluctant
conscript in the Eritrean army,
this computer
expert fled the Horn of Africa
country whose government has
been accused of widespread
human rights abuses.
MAN: We considered Europe as the
heaven of the earth, but it was
not just like that.
I really didn't expect the
places that we are living here
to be like this. I'm trying
to go to the train. But it's
very difficult for me. I'm being
here in order to go to England.
But it's very difficult. But
everybody who is living here has
his or her own ambition.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Why should
England allow you to come into
the country?
MAN: My dream is to go to
England. When I compare -- for
example, when I compare England
with Germany, England
is comfortable for me.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Calais used to
have a Red Cross refugee camp,
but it was closed in 2002
after Britain protested that it
was encouraging illegal
immigration.
The problem has never gone away.
And at city hall, there is
irritation from Deputy Mayor
Philippe Mignonet that Britain
is calling the shots.
PHILIPPE MIGNONET, Deputy Mayor:
We really are desperate because
it's killing the major
oft city more so than ever. It's
killing the economy of the city
as well. We all know they
want to go to England. Whether
they are right or wrong, whether
benefits in England are
right or wrong, it's not a
problem. They want to go to
England.
This is where we must have in
Calais a summit between France
and England involving the city
of Calais, because at the
moment, the ministers are
talking with each other, but
where is
the city of Calais in that?
MALCOLM BRABANT: Now, if the
European Union law on asylum
seekers and refugees was being
applied properly, France would
take many of these people in, or
it would return them to
the first European country
where they landed.
But this is not happening. The
Conservative government in
London believes that many of
these people are attracted to
the United Kingdom's generous
welfare benefits. And they have
started
the process of reducing the
amount of money available. And
according to Britain's
immigration
minister, he says the current
system shouldn't offer what he
calls any perverse incentives
for illegal migrants to lodge
spurious asylum applications or
encourage those without genuine
claims for humanitarian
protection to prolong their stay
in the United Kingdom.
TIM FARRON, Liberal Democrats:
The majority of people they see
are not economic migrants.
They are probably fleeing
insecurity of one kind or
another.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The most senior
British politician to visit the
Jungle has been Tim Farron of
the Liberal Democrats. Once, as
part of the governing coalition,
the party could soften
British policy. Now, in
opposition, it can only roar.
TIM FARRON: It seems to me that
the approach of the U.K.
Conservative government is about
being confrontational on two
levels, first of all,
confrontational towards the
desperate
people here, and then also
confrontational towards our
colleagues throughout the rest
of Europe, many of whom now look
at the United Kingdom as being
just unnecessarily belligerent,
not a team player, and indeed
exacerbating this crisis.
My attitude is to work with
others to try and find long-term
solutions and to treat
these people here
like human beings.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But isn't the
problem that, if you start
opening the floodgates, as the
Conservatives would see it, what
you're going to do is you're
going to encourage even more
people in the rest of the world
to head in this direction?
TIM FARRON: So, first of all,
I'm not arguing to open the
floodgates at all. I'm arguing
for us to sign up to the
European concord that would that
we would be taking our fair
share, a few hundred from
across the European Union.
WOMAN: I don't know.
MALCOLM BRABANT: In recognition
that many migrants won't make it
to Britain, there is
a school teaching French to
those considering seeking
political asylum here. Its
founder
is an exuberant Nigerian
called Zimarco Jones.
ZIMARCO JONES, School Founder:
If I went to Japan today, I
would try to go to school to
learn Japanese language. It's
something everywhere to do. You
need to speak the language.
My dream is to change this camp.
I want to make something
different in this Jungle to
show people that we are not what
they are thinking. For example,
they say Jungle. In
jungle -- animal is living in
the jungle. We -- we don't live
in a jungle here.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Throughout the
camp, there are the reminders of
the perils of jumping
on trains or trucks. Ten people
have been killed since June. The
risk is a major incentive
to remain in France.
MAN: Over there, I say to
myself, I want to go there, but
I really can't chance to go
there. To see my friends, they
are dying and they are cutting
their hands and fingers.
MALCOLM BRABANT: For nearly
1,000 years, the narrow English
Channel has protected Britain
from invasion. Migrants face the
same obstacles that defeated
great armies. The refugee influx
is perhaps Europe's biggest
crisis of the decade.
And Calais port boss Jean-Marc
Puissesseau wants to see a
change in Western foreign
policy.
JEAN-MARC PUISSESSEAU, Port
Boss: The wars which has been
done has increased the number
of refugees coming to Europe. I
think we should take care to
help more of the countries which
are (INAUDIBLE) the Sudan, as
Eritrea (INAUDIBLE) which
belongs to Iraq and to Syria, is
something
much more difficult.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Another day in
the Jungle dawns with devotions
at a church from tarpaulins
by African Christians. They're
seeking intervention.
For their prayers to be
answered, Britain must soften
its stance. And at the moment,
there is no sign of compromise
across the Channel.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant in Calais.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And to the
analysis of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and New York Times
columnist David Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
So, the first debate among,
David, 10 of the 17 Republicans
running for president last
night, what's your assessment?
DAVID BROOKS: It was great. It
was a great debate. Trump brings
the party, and I hope
he stays. Maybe in the general,
they can stick him in. I thought
he was -- he livens the
atmosphere. He's not
a real candidate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He's
not a real candidate?
DAVID BROOKS: No. He doesn't
have an ideology. He doesn't
have a belief system.
He has himself. And they went
after him, the three excellent
moderators. And he defended
himself and I think he did fine.
Probably 70 percent of
Republicans disapprove of him.
A lot of the things he said were
astonishingly inappropriate,
that he wouldn't support the
Republican Party nominee. That's
kind of a big one. He likes
single-payer health system.
That's the first Republican
that sort of likes that.
He is outside of all the
categories, but he is a lord of
self-esteem. And his main
message
is society is filled with
losers, and they happen to be
running it, and society has some
winners who are being ignored.
And if you're a winner like me,
we got to get rid of those
losers.
And that's an ideology that is
not a political ideology. It is
a narcissistic ideology. But
I suspect the 20 percent who
like him will continue to like
him and like him even more.
And so he will be
hanging around there.
Among the real candidates, I
thought Rubio did quite well.
Carly Fiorina in the underdebate
card did quite well. And John
Kasich did quite well. And so I
think those three helped
themselves
and they actually are viable
candidates and make us rethink
the race.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do
you size it up, Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: I don't know where
to agree and where -- no.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: I agree. Donald
Trump fills up the hall. There
were 24 million people
who watched. That's more people
than had ever watched a cable
event, other than a sports
event.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Huge numbers.
MARK SHIELDS: And this
was a sports event.
Donald Trump indicated right at
the outset he is going to run as
Donald Trump. And I
thought it was an indication of
the magic he has established,the
chemistry he has with
Republican voters, that the only
person on the stage, candidate
who would even take a
shot at him was Rand Paul.
All the others ducked him, John
Kasich included, Jeb Bush
included, when given
opportunities.
Who went after him? The three
FOX moderators, who were tough.
They really did. And I really
think he made a serious mistake
by going, retaliating, attacking
Megyn Kelly. First
of all...
JUDY WOODRUFF: When she asked
him about his comments about
women.
MARK SHIELDS: Asked him about
women, his misogynist comments.
First of all, FOX News is the
validator, it's the gatekeeper
for Republican, particularly
conservative voters. And you
don't go after -- it is not like
you're attacking Chuck Todd
or Judy Woodruff or some of the
liberal elite establishment.
You're attacking the mother
church when you go after FOX.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's make
a distinction here, please. I'm
not part of the liberal
media.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: No, but I'm
talking about by the definition
of conservative America, where
FOX really is the gatekeeper --
I think you would agree, the
gatekeeper and the validator.
And when he went after her, I
think he made a serious mistake.
I thought, as far as the
others were concerned...
JUDY WOODRUFF: You don't
think he helped himself?
MARK SHIELDS: I think he
hurt himself. I really do.
He's a combination quite unlike
anything I have ever seen
before. I agree partially with
David that it is sort of egotism
and cynicism. Everybody is
transactional. You believe
nothing.
Why do you give money to
Democrats? You give money to
Democrats because you are going
to
give them a call and they're
going to do what you want.
Everything. There's no ideal.
John Kennedy said he was an
idealist without illusions.
Donald Trump is a cynic without
illusions. Nothing is on the
level. You go into bankruptcy
four times. You screw the
investors. Hey, that's the way
it's done now.
I just -- I thought he came
across really, by having taken
on FOX News, and particularly
Chris Wallace and Bret Baier,
and particularly Megyn Kelly, I
think he made a mistake.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you said,
David, a minute ago you thought
Marco Rubio did well and you
thought John Kasich did
well. What stood out?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. So,
Rubio has a message. The message
is, America is changing fast.
I'm surrounded by a bunch
of old guys who don't get it.
And I get it. I get Amazon. I
get Airbnb. That's actually
a pretty good message. And it
goes with his belief system. And
he presents very well.
And he's very articulate and
well-spoken and smart. And so he
has a message.
Kasich has a different message,
which is unique and I think
reflective also of the times,
which is we need growth, but we
need compassion. And so he
defends some of the New Deal
social
programs, even Great Society
social programs. But he said we
got to grow. And then once
we grow, we got to share.
And early in the program, we had
his passage on going to a
marriage of a gay friend. That
is a broadening message. That is
actually a general election
message. And Rubio also
has a general election message.
And so if you are a Republican
mainstreamer, and you
are trying to think, who can
win, well, walking in, you
thought, well, Jeb Bush appeals
to
a lot of people.
And we all go around the country
and we hear a lot people who are
not particularly political,
but they think, Jeb Bush, he
seems acceptable. He was meh at
the debate. He was fine, but
not terrible, not great. But
these two guys have something
new, and something that actually
could be viable. And you know,
Florida and Ohio, if those two
are on the ticket, you're
doing OK.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Mark, but you
see some delineation there? I
mean, there's now some
-- more separation between these
candidates as a result of this
debate?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes. Yes. It
wasn't -- nobody has called -- I
will say the person who probably
had the best night
was Carly Fiorina.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Who was on
earlier. She wasn't even in the
big debate.
MARK SHIELDS: She was
on the early one.
And Mark Russell, the great
satirist, said, who won the 5:00
debate? Carly Fiorina. Who
won the 9:00 debate? Carly
Fiorina. I think she represents
something Republicans need.
They want her on that stage,
because when she goes after
Hillary Clinton, again, we
can't be accused of misogyny
if it's a woman doing it.
And she does it quite
effectively. I thought Marco
Rubio had a good night. Marco
Rubio
plays better to the
punditocracy, those of us who
cover it, than he has directly
to voters.
His numbers have not been great.
He doesn't seem to have a base.
But he really -- I thought
he handled himself
quite well last night.
I wasn't as impressed as other
-- David and others were with
John Kasich. He was given
the opportunity by Chris Wallace
after Donald Trump made this
outrageous statement about
Mexico, the government is
sending criminals across the
border. And Chris Wallace asked
him for any evidence.
He had no evidence.
He said, I was at the Border
Patrol, had a visit in Laredo.
And he said, what about that?
He said, no, we're doing it
because American politicians and
leaders are dumb, and the
Mexican government is smart. And
they're sticking us with the
bill. And he turns to John
Kasich
and he said, what about that,
Governor? And John Kasich said,
Donald Trump has touched
into something in America,
instead of confronting him.
I just -- I thought that Rubio
had a good, good night. And Jeb
Bush was wallpaper. There
was no sense of command to him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Whoa.
That's tough.
Just quickly, if both of you
think Fiorina had a good night,
what does that say though
about the system that is leaving
the other seven, the people who
don't make the cut of
10, apart in a separate event?
What does it say about...
DAVID BROOKS: There's a super
bad problem with the polls,
which is they're polling
everybody.
They're not polling people who
are actually going to vote.
And Donald Trump's voters are
what they call low-information
voters. They're classically
the kind of people who don't
vote in primaries. In some
sense, his lead is completely --
not
completely, but
largely artificial.
Meanwhile, we have been hearing
on the campaign trail there's
been a buzz about Fiorina for
a couple months. And so she just
got to show it to a broader
audience. But she has earned
her way into the next calendar.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quick
questions about the Democrats.
Earlier this week, Mark, a lot
of reporting about whether or
not Joe Biden may get into
the race. There's some fairly
reliable reporting that he's
thinking about it. Pros, cons.
MARK SHIELDS: He's
thinking about it.
Judy, he ran for first time in
1988. He ran in 2008. He's been
vice president for eight
years. It's always been in his
DNA to run for president. And
Hillary Clinton's numbers
in the Wall Street Journal/NBC
poll took a bad tumble between
June and August.
Among woman, she now has a
negative rating. This was
supposed to be her golden source
of support to give her the new
coalition. It has to be tempting
at this point. I don't
think anybody knows. I would bet
that he doesn't, but it's got to
be tempting if she starts
to look very vulnerable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pros and cons?
DAVID BROOKS: He shouldn't do
it. He shouldn't do it. He's a
wonderful, wonderful man. He's
a great public servant.
This country and especially the
Democratic Party is in the mood
for systemic change and
something fundamental,
different. They don't want a
sign of the establishment
running their
party. That's what she is
facing. She's in a dominant
position, but the tide is
against
her. The mood of the times are
against her. The mood of the
times are certainly against
him.
So you got to pick your year.
It's not his year. If he runs, I
think he will do some
damage to his
long-term reputation.
MARK SHIELDS: He doesn't have a
lot of other years to choose,
David.
DAVID BROOKS: Well...
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: We
will talk about that.
Very different subject here at
the end, the Iran nuclear deal.
The president gave another
passionate defense this week,
made a speech at American
University. He has had a number
of Democrats come out, Mark, in
favor, but he lost a big one in
Senator Chuck Schumer
last night.
How significant is that? Is the
president making any headway
with this argument?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, the president
is. He needs a third plus one in
either the House or the
Senate, one of the two.
And, obviously, Jewish members,
including such as Chuck Schumer,
are very much a target,
because of, understandably,
Israel's position; 92 countries
have endorsed this nuclear
agreement,
Judy, including Lebanon and
Saudi Arabia and Iraq and
Jordan, as well as...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Egypt.
MARK SHIELDS: ... great American
ally, Egypt, but -- Algeria.
But the United States here,
there is a real premium on Sandy
Levin of Michigan supporting
it. Chuck Schumer is an
important legislator. He's going
to be the next Democratic
leader.
The fact that Kirsten
Gillibrand, his colleague in New
York and very close, at the same
time
came out in support of the
president's position may
indicate that Chuck Schumer is
not going
to spend a lot of time, effort,
energy trying to proselytize
other members.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How
significant is this?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, first of all,
I don't think Bibi Netanyahu's
opposition has anything to
with Chuck Schumer's opposition
or the Israeli position has
anything to do -- I think it's
a terrible deal not
because Israel does.
I just think it's a terrible
deal that will endanger the
Middle East for generations to
come. And I'm sure Schumer came
to the same conclusion. In the
public opinion, Obama is
losing the argument. The latest
poll I saw was 2-1 against among
the American public.
And, frankly, I thought Obama's
speech -- he's a great
speechmaker, he's a great
arguer.
Certainly one of his weakest
speeches, in which you're
sitting on the fence.
It's a close issue. He says, oh,
it's not a close issue. It's
transparently a close
issue. It's a tough debate.
Second, if you are on the fence,
he was insulting you in
your thinking that, you're so
stupid. You were wrong in the
past.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Equating it with
opposing -- or going to war in
Iran.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. It was just,
I found, a very high-handed
speech designed to offend,
not to persuade.
MARK SHIELDS: I really -- I do
think Judy, quite frankly, that
the president is making
the same case that Ronald Reagan
made in dealing with the
Soviets, negotiating with Iran.
They're
not nice people. They're not
good people, but it is
important. And I think he's
making
the case.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields,
David Brooks, we thank you.
Champion swimmer Katie Ledecky
is stunning the world this week
with feats that have rarely
been seen. The 18-year-old
cruised along during her final
heat at the world championships
in Russia today, putting her in
the top spot for tomorrow's
final in the 800-meter
freestyle.
Throughout the week, she has
been blowing past the
competition, setting records and
generating talk of
historic milestones.
Hari Sreenivasan has the story.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Just to try to
put this in perspective, if
Katie Ledecky wins tomorrow,
she will have completed an
unprecedented sweep of the 200,
the 400, the 800 and 1,500 meter
freestyles at a single
world championship.
She also set world records this
week. And assuming all goes
well, she will have raced
6,200 meters in seven days when
you include heats and relays.
Since winning the gold medal
at the 2012 Olympics, she has
set 13 of the fastest racing
times in history.
Summer Sanders is a former
Olympic gold medal swimmer
herself, as well as a sports
commentator
and reporter who's been watching
all of this. She joins me now
from Salt Lake City.
You know, there's a lot of
people who don't follow swimming
who are starting to wake up
to this story. Why is
this so spectacular?
SUMMER SANDERS, Olympic Gold
Medalist: Well, I think it goes
back in history.
I think most people remember
Janet Evans, the queen of
distance swimming. She held most
of these world records up until
Katie broke them. And so we
haven't seen this dominance
from the American swimmers in
the sport of distance swimming.
Honestly, most kids, if
they have the distance gene,
prefer to push themselves to the
400 and 200, because it's
so difficult to train
for the 800 and 1,500.
But the fact that Katie is doing
it and she's dominating time and
time and time again -- and
she just sort of has this inner
personality. I describe it as
like she's a sprinter
personality
on the inside, but a distance on
the outside. I love her fist
pump when she wins and her
enthusiasm that she is showing.
She's making distance swimming
cool.
HARI SREENIVASAN: She are
incredibly different events.
Training for a 200 meter, a
sprint-type
event, vs. essentially a mile in
the pool, and she actually did
both races in one day
earlier this week.
SUMMER SANDERS: Yes, she had the
semifinals of the 200 freestyle
right after she, like,
shattered her own record
in the 1,500 freestyle.
And I would love for people to
understand how that is a huge
difference in swimming.
We haven't seen it for a long
time where we had prelims, then
a semis, and then the next
day a finals. Now, she doesn't
have to do that for 800 and
1,500, but that's really,
really difficult to do that over
a stretch of about seven days of
a world championships
or an Olympic Games.
It takes its toll. So, that
makes all of these records and
wins so much more astonishing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
things people are wondering is,
how does she do it? Is she
a natural? Does she just work
harder? These are amazing times
that she's setting and then
breaking.
SUMMER SANDERS: I interviewed
Katie at the 2012 Olympic
trials, young Katie. Right? She
is 14 now. Sorry. She's 18
now, so she was 15 back then.
And her big milestone next was,
is she going to get her driver's
license? She wasn't too
excited about her driver's
license, but she was real
excited to be going to London to
compete in the Olympic Games.
And then of course she has,
like, blown everyone away
at London, wins the gold medal.
And now, all of a sudden, we
really get to know this Katie
Ledecky. She has an incredible
natural talent. But I will say
this like standing on the top of
a building to all the young
swimmers out there. Your natural
talent takes you only to a
certain point. And then you
have got to decide that you want
to put the work in and really,
really go for it.
I mean, she's like American
ninja warrior inside of a
distance swimmer. She works her
tail off every single day to be
at her absolute best on game
day. And she has the mentality.
I know you can see it. She looks
so innocent and sweet. But,
inside, she's just a tiger.
She wants to win. She wants to
dominate, not only for herself,
but for her team, her family
and for the sport of swimming
and for distance swimming.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There are
stories about how she continued
even when she was in high
school to race with her high
school team, play, and go and
swim with her club team.
This is an Olympic medalist who
still enjoys swimming at her
core.
But there was also something
interesting. As you start seeing
these world records, sometimes,
she is really just racing
herself. Nobody is even close to
her. How do you push yourself
when you're in the pool and
you're working against the world
record that's held by you?
SUMMER SANDERS: Yes, I know. I
never had that problem, Hari.
I wish I did at times. But that
would mean I would have to swim
a really, really long
race, and my longest was the 400
I.M. It is. It's an inner drive.
We swimmers, people look
at it, and they're like, how do
you do it? You stare at a black
line for hours and hours
and hours?
But we're really not. It's like
the original Zen workout,
swimming. You have got to get
inside your head, and you have
got to decide that you want to
push yourself super hard
today. And why? Because you want
to beta that person or that
time, or you want that feeling
of touching the wall and
dominating, knowing that you
gave it your absolute best,
nothing
was left outside the pool, it
was all left inside the pool.
And I think that that's
something that needs to be
recognized and celebrated in
Katie.
It's what makes her so unique,
not just this feat that she's
probably going to pull off
on Saturday, but that inner
drive, that she came back from
an Olympic Games and a gold
medal to dominate again
four years later.
That is so incredibly difficult
and it's what makes the Olympic
Games so amazing and beautiful
still to this day.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Summer Sanders, thanks so much.
SUMMER SANDERS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The past few
years have brought growing
attention to the lack of
diversity
among film actors and the
creators of American movies.
And a new report this week shows
just how wide the gap remains,
despite some high-profile
successes.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: Special effects,
action and suspense, big
production films in recent years
have provided plenty of what
audiences have come to expect,
including, according to various
studies, a widespread
lack of diversity.
The latest research comes from
the Annenberg School for
Communication and Journalism at
the University of Southern
California. The survey of the
annual 100 top grossing films
between 2007 and 2014 found that
just 30 percent of all speaking
or named characters were women,
while 73 percent of such
roles went to whites.
As to the filmmakers, only about
2 percent of the movies were
directed by women. The
Web site Every Single Word has
made a mission of highlighting
the lack of diversity in movies
by compiling every line spoken
by a person of color in any
major film. This video, from
the 2014 movie "Maleficent,"
lasted just 18 seconds.
This creator of Every Single
Word, Dylan Marron, joins us
now. He's also an actor and
writer.
Also with us, Washington Post
movie critic Ann Hornaday.
Well, Dylan Marron, you have
been documenting this for a long
time. How does this new study
sharpen the picture?
What jumps out at you?
DYLAN MARRON, Every Single
Word: I think a lot jumps out.
One of the biggest things that
jumped out for me is the
correlation between black
directors
and putting black characters in
their movie. And that speaks a
lot to this conversation
we have of we need more
creators. The creators are
already out there, but what we
need do
is we need to take those
creators and we need to project
their stories onto a bigger
screen
and they need to be distributed
to a larger audience.
And that way, there will be more
accurate reflections of the
populations that they're
serving.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're an actor
yourself, so you have seen this
play out?
DYLAN MARRON: I have
seen this firsthand.
Yes, I have seen it in meetings
with agents. I have seen it in
casting calls. And I have
just seen it in
general reception.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, Ann Hornaday,
we have talked about this
before. For both women and
African-Americans,
actors and directors, there have
been some very successful and
critically acclaimed films,
especially in recent years. Do
we see these as exceptions? What
do you see when you look
out there?
ANN HORNADAY, Film Critic, The
Washington Post: Well,
absolutely.
You know, the last couple of
years have really seen a
flowering, and we have seen this
wonderful
renaissance in African-American
filmmaking, from the likes of
Dee Rees and Ava DuVernay
and Ryan Coogler, and Gina
Prince-Bythewood, of course, who
has been around for a while,
but has just been
doing wonderful work.
So there's been a lot to
celebrate. And then this year, a
number of the top 10 movies this
year are female-centric, from
things like ""Fifty Shades of
Grey" and "Cinderella" to
"Spy" and "Trainweck," also
did very well this summer.
And there are smaller movies
that are featuring women, like
"Ricki and the Flash" is coming
out this weekend and "The Diary
of a Teenage Girl." Things like
this, studies like this,
we get these statistics as sort
of a steady drumbeat, and it's
just a reminder that we
should remember not to fall over
ourselves with gratitude for
crumbs, when the bigger
picture, as you point out,
is a lot more sobering.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, Ann, one of
the possible responses will be,
this is what audiences
want, this is what sells, it's a
business, right? Is that true?
Does that help explain
what we see or not?
ANN HORNADAY: No.
Yes, you're right it's a
business. I think this kind of
lack of representation actually
has three costs. And the first
is absolutely financial. I mean,
Hollywood is leaving money
on the table when women and
African-American audiences prove
over and over again that they
go see movies about themselves.
And so, for studios to not cater
to those audiences, women alone,
women of all races
buy 50 percent of the movie
tickets, and they heavily
influence the other 50 percent.
The
other big cost would be
aesthetic in terms of just the
actual stories that are being
told and the grand diversity and
sort of texture and depth of the
stories that we're missing
up on screen.
And then maybe the most profound
cost is really psychic, in terms
of when -- especially when
young people are going to the
movies and they see this sort of
monolithic, monotone,
monochromatic
version of what it is to be
human. That's what we're
internalizing as the norm.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, Dylan Marron,
what do you see as the causes?
Why does it continue?
DYLAN MARRON: I think this is
largely structural, right?
So, people are just so concerned
about losing money. And you
mentioned leaving money on
the table. I think these
financiers, everyone who is
putting up money for these
films, they
are really operating on archaic
and even imaginary statistics.
They are so afraid that if they
change up the formula, if they
don't keep putting white people
in the leads of these
movies as these protagonist
roles, that they are going to
lose money.
So, as we see with the "Fast and
the Furious" and other big
franchises that kind of branch
out, this is just not true.
JEFFREY BROWN: And yet, Dylan,
there is a growing awareness,
right? Your site is popular,
made a lot of in-way on social
media. We see a lot of studies
like this, so there is certainly
more awareness at least.
DYLAN MARRON: I think there's a
lot of awareness. But what does
that do?
We just saw the trailer for the
"Stonewall" movie come out.
That's the new the Roland
Emmerich film about the
Stonewall Riots. And it's
completely whitewashed, right?
There
is a black trans woman who
actually was one of the leaders,
and she's completely silenced.
It's rewritten to include
a white cis male lead.
The whitewashing continues.
People have been aware for so
long. I'm continuing the
tradition
of awareness. I just
presented it in a new way.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, Ann Hornaday,
just you started to mention some
films that are -- I
just want to give you a brief
chance here for people that want
to see films that portray
this piece of American life that
often is not portrayed. Where do
they look?
ANN HORNADAY: Well, you know, I
think to Dylan's point, a big
problem is the financing
structure,
and more and more the financings
that are coming from
international financiers or it
is being oriented to
international audiences.
And there's this assumption that
only certain stories and
characters will sell overseas.
But we are seeing some really
encouraging work on the indie
scale. I mentioned "Diary
of a Teenage Girl," which is a
wonderful depiction of a young
woman coming of age.
I would include a really
interesting movie called
"Tangerine" about two trans
women in
L.A. It's kind of this raucous,
picaresque day in the life, very
funny, very closely
and intimately and
compassionately observed.
And then sort of midrange
movies, like "Ricki and the
Flash" with Meryl Streep, they
are
still getting made. And,
generally, when they do get
made, they do really well if
they can
hang on long enough
and find an audience.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Ann
Hornaday, Dylan Marron, thank
you both very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: You may have seen the
stellar photo earlier this
week. A science satellite
captured the moon photo bombing
Earth, revealing its rarely
seen dark side. It got us
thinking, why don't we ever get
to see the far side of the moon
from here on Earth? Well, we
have got an explainer, and
that's on our home page. All
that and
more is on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs from our PBS
colleagues.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week," which airs
later this evening. Here's a
preview:
GWEN IFILL: What we know for
sure: Donald Trump isn't going
away. What else we know?
No one else is either. We will
get to the bottom of it all,
including why the candidates
spent more time attacking each
other than going after Hillary
Clinton, what last night's
debate tells us about the state
of the 2016 race -- tonight on
"Washington Week" -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On "PBS NewsHour
Weekend" Saturday: a report on
patients facing life-and-death
decisions, and the doctors who
are required to talk to them
about it.
A final news note. We're waiting
now on a decision coming shortly
from a Colorado jury
on whether the Aurora movie
theater gunman gets life in
prison or the death penalty.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank
you, and good night.